New multi-course structure for training materials (#486)
nextflow-io/training: docs/hello_nextflow/02_hello_channels.md

Workflows typically run on batches of inputs that are meant to be processed in bulk, so we want to upgrade the workflow to accept multiple input values.

### 2.1. Load multiple greetings into the input channel

Conveniently, the `Channel.of()` channel factory we've been using is quite happy to accept more than one value, so we don't need to modify that at all.
We just have to load more values into the channel.

In the workflow block, make the following code change:

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="46"
// create a channel for inputs
greeting_ch = Channel.of('Hello')
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="46"
// create a channel for inputs
greeting_ch = Channel.of('Hello','Bonjour','Holà')
```

The documentation tells us this should work. Can it really be so simple?

### 2.2. Run the command and look at the log output

Let's try it.

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf
```

Well, it certainly seems to run just fine:

```console title="Output"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

 ┃ Launching `hello-channels.nf` [lonely_pare] DSL2 - revision: b9f1d96905

executor >  local (3)
[3d/1fe62c] sayHello (2)       [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
```

> However... This seems to indicate that '3 of 3' calls were made for the process, which is encouraging, but this only give us one subdirectory path. What's going on?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However... This seems to indicate that '3 of 3' calls were made for the process, which is encouraging, but this only shows us a single run of the process, with one subdirectory path (`3d/1fe62c...`). What's going on?
```

The previous one made me think I should be looking at the actual directories momentarily.

By default, the ANSI logging system writes the logging from multiple calls to the same process on the same line. Fortunately, we can disable that behavior.

### 2.3. Run the command again with the `-ansi-log false` option

To expand the logging to display one line per process call, add `-ansi-log false` to the command.

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf -ansi-log false
```

> This time we see all six work subdirectories listed in the output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This time we see all three process runs and their associated work subdirectories listed in the output:
```

```console title="Output"
N E X T F L O W  ~  version 24.02.0-edge
Launching `hello-channels.nf` [big_woese] DSL2 - revision: 53f20aeb70
[62/d81e63] Submitted process > sayHello (1)
[19/507af3] Submitted process > sayHello (2)
[8a/3126e6] Submitted process > sayHello (3)
```

That's much better; at least for a simple workflow.

> For a complex workflow, or a large number of inputs, having the full list output to the terminal might get a bit overwhelming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a complex workflow, or a large number of inputs, having the full list output to the terminal might get a bit overwhelming, so you might not choose to use `-ansi-log false` in those cases.
```

That being said, we have another problem. If you look in the `results` directory, there is only one file: `output.txt`!

```console title="Directory contents"
results
└── output.txt
```

What's up with that? Shouldn't we be expecting a separate file per input greeting, so three files in all?
Did all three greetings go into a single file?

> You can check the contents of `output.txt`; you will find only one of the three.

Reviewer: Add an example cat command?

You may recall that we hardcoded the output file name for the `sayHello` process, so all three calls produced a file called `output.txt`.
You can check the work subdirectories for each of the three processes; each of them contains a file called `output.txt` as expected.

As long as the output files stay there, isolated from the other processes, that is okay.
But when the `publishDir` directive copies each of them to the same `results` directory, whichever got copied there first gets overwritten by the next one, and so on.

### 2.4. Ensure the output file names will be unique

We can continue publishing all the outputs to the same results directory, but we need to ensure they will have unique names.
Specifically, we need to modify the first process to generate a file name dynamically so that the final file names will be unique.

> So how do we make the file names unique? A common way to do that is to use some unique piece of metadata as part of the file name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So how do we make the file names unique? A common way to do that is to use some unique piece of metadata from the inputs (received from the input channel) as part of the output file name.
```

Here, for convenience, we'll just use the greeting itself since it's just a short string, and prepend it to the base output filename.

In the process block, make the following code changes:

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="11"
process sayHello {

    publishDir 'results', mode: 'copy'

    input:
        val greeting

    output:
        path 'output.txt'

    script:
    """
    echo '$greeting' > output.txt
    """
}
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="11"
process sayHello {

    publishDir 'results', mode: 'copy'

    input:
        val greeting

    output:
        path "${greeting}-output.txt"

    script:
    """
    echo '$greeting' > '$greeting-output.txt'
    """
}
```

Make sure to replace `output.txt` in both the output definition and in the `script:` command block.

!!! tip

    In the output definition, you MUST use double quotes around the output filename expression (NOT single quotes), otherwise it will fail.

> This should produce a unique output file name every time the process is called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should produce a unique output file name every time the process is called, so that it can be distinguished from the outputs from other iterations of the same process in the output directory.
```
Just doubling down, not sure if it's helpful.

### 2.5. Run the workflow and look at the results directory

Let's run it and check that it works.

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf
```

Reverting back to the summary view, the output looks like this again:

```console title="Output"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

 ┃ Launching `hello-channels.nf` [jovial_mccarthy] DSL2 - revision: 53f20aeb70

executor >  local (3)
[03/f007f2] sayHello (1)       [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
```

But more importantly, now we have three new files in addition to the one we already had in the `results` directory:

```console title="Directory contents"
results
├── Bonjour-output.txt
├── Hello-output.txt
├── Holà-output.txt
└── output.txt
```

Success! Now we can add as many greetings as we like without worrying about output files being overwritten.

!!! note

>     In practice, naming files based on the input data itself is almost always impractical.
>     The better way to generate dynamic filenames is to use a samplesheet contain relevant metadata (such as unique sample IDs) and create a data structure called a 'map'.
>     We can then pass the map to the processes, which can be set up to select an appropriate identifier to generate the filenames.
>     You'll learn how to do that later in your Nextflow training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In practice, naming files based on the input data itself is almost always impractical.
    The better way to generate dynamic filenames is to pass metatdata to a process along with the input files. We can derive that metadata from a sample sheet as we're reading the input files. 
    You'll learn how to do that later in your Nextflow training.
```

I think the current note is too complex for someone just getting used to the idea of channels.

Author: completely agree

### Takeaway

> You know how to feed a batch of multiple input elements through a channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You know how to feed multiple input elements through a channel.
```

### What's next?

Learn how to make the workflow take a file as its source of input values.

---

## 3. Use CLI parameters to supply input values

> We want to be able to specify the input from the command line, since that is the piece that will almost always be different in subsequent runs of the workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we're actually using our workflow, we want to be able to control its inputs from the command line. 
```

```console title="Output"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

 ┃ Launching `hello-channels.nf` [wise_waddington] DSL2 - revision: 988fc779cf

executor >  local (1)
[c0/8b8332] sayHello (1) [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
```

Check the output in the results directory, and... Tadaa! It works!
Nextflow used the default value to name the output.

### 3.5. Run the workflow again with the parameter to override the default value

If you provide the parameter on the command line, the CLI value will override the default value.

Try it out:

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf --greeting 'Konnichiwa!'
```

The console output should look the same, and you will have the corresponding new output in your results directory.

!!! note

    In Nextflow, there are multiple places where you can specify values for parameters.
    If the same parameter is set to different values in multiple places, Nexflow will determine what value to use based on the order of precedence that is described [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/config.html).

### Takeaway

You know how to use CLI parameters to feed inputs to the workflow.

### What's next?

Learn how to manage channel contents using operators.

---

> ## 4. Supply a batch of multiple values via the `params` system

Reviewer: Would this not be a good place to stop, and have a subsequent (possibly quite short) 'hello operators', using `flatten` and `splitCsv` as exemplars?

Author: As discussed in slack, I'll add some more explicit text calling out the importance of operators in section 4 and won't split anything out for now.

In this part of the course, you will learn how to use a channel to handle multiple inputs from a variety of different sources.
You will also learn to use **operators** to transform channel contents as needed.

_For training on using channels to connect steps in a multi-step workflow, see Part 3 of this course._

---

## 0. Warmup: Run `hello-channels.nf`

We're going to use the workflow script `hello-channels.nf` as a starting point.
It is equivalent to the script produced by working through Part 1 of this training course.

Just to make sure everything is working, run the script once before making any changes:

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf --greeting 'Hello Channels!'
```

```console title="Output"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

Launching `hello-channels.nf` [insane_lichterman] DSL2 - revision: c33d41f479

executor >  local (1)
[86/9efa08] sayHello | 1 of 1 ✔
```

As previously, you will find the output file named `output.txt` in the `results` directory (specified by the `publishDir` directive).

> ```console title="output.txt" linenums="1"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```console title="results/output.txt" linenums="1"
```

Hello Channels!
```

If that worked for you, you're ready to learn about channels.

---

## 1. Provide variable inputs via a channel explicitly

We are going to create a **channel** to pass the variable input to the `sayHello()` process instead of relying on the implicit handling, which has certain limitations.

### 1.1. Create an input channel

There are a variety of **channel factories** that we can use to set up a channel.
To keep things simple for now, we are going to use the most basic channel factory, called `Channel.of`, which will create a channel containing a single value.

> Functionally this will be exactly equivalent to how we had it set up before, but explicit instead of implicit.

Reviewer 2: `Channel.value(` would be functionally/exactly equivalent to how we had it set up before, but explicit instead of implicit. The implicit conversion to channel creates a value channel. `Channel.of`, which we're using now, creates a queue channel.

I'd rephrase this phrase as something like "Instead of having Nextflow create a channel implicitly, we are doing this explicitly now."

Author: fair point, addressed in commit

This is the line of code we're going to use:

```console title="Syntax"
greeting_ch = Channel.of('Hello Channels!')
```

> This creates a channel called `greeting_ch` using the `Channel.of()` channel factory, which sets up a simple value channel, and loads the string `'Hello Channels!'` to use as the greeting value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This creates a channel called `greeting_ch` using the `Channel.of()` channel factory, which sets up a simple queue channel, and loads the string `'Hello Channels!'` to use as the greeting value.
```

If you want a value channel with `Channel.of`, you must apply a channel operator that returns a single channel element, such as `last,` `first,` `collect,` etc, e.g `Channel.of('Hello').first()`.

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="27"
workflow {

    // create a channel for inputs
    greeting_ch = Channel.of('Hello Channels!')

    // emit a greeting
    sayHello(params.greeting)
}
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="27"
workflow {

    // create a channel for inputs
    greeting_ch = Channel.of('Hello Channels!')

    // emit a greeting
    sayHello(greeting_ch)
}
```

This tells Nextflow to run the `sayHello` process on the contents of the `greeting_ch` channel.

Now our workflow is properly functional; it is the explicit equivalent of writing `sayHello('Hello Channels!')`.

### 1.3. Run the workflow command again

Let's run it!

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf
```

If you made both edits correctly, you should get another successful execution:

```console title="Output" linenums="1"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

Launching `hello-channels.nf` [nice_heisenberg] DSL2 - revision: 41b4aeb7e9

executor >  local (1)
[3b/f2b109] sayHello (1) | 1 of 1 ✔
```

You can check the results directory to satisfy yourself that the outcome is still the same as previously.

> ```console title="output.txt" linenums="1"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```console title="results/output.txt" linenums="1"
```

Hello Channels!
```

So far we're just progressively tweaking the code to increase the flexibility of our workflow while achieving the same end result.

!!! note

    This may seem like we're writing more code for no tangible benefit, but the value will become clear as soon as we start handling more inputs.

### Takeaway

You know how to use a basic channel factory to provide an input to a process.

### What's next?

Learn how to use channels to make the workflow iterate over multiple input values.

---

## 2. Modify the workflow to run on multiple input values

Workflows typically run on batches of inputs that are meant to be processed in bulk, so we want to upgrade the workflow to accept multiple input values.

### 2.1. Load multiple greetings into the input channel

Conveniently, the `Channel.of()` channel factory we've been using is quite happy to accept more than one value, so we don't need to modify that at all.

> We just have to load more values into the channel.

Reviewer 2: I have always referred to the individual entries in a channel as elements, so as to not make people confused with what we mean by values when we talk about value channels (singletons). As we mention value channels in this part II, I'd rather call these elements. See the example below.

```
Channel.of('A', 'B', '[C, D]')
```
A, B, and [C, D] are three elements in the channel. C and D are items in the third channel.

Author: ok feel free to suggest changes directly; otherwise let's do this in a refinement pass after this is merged in.

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="31"
    // create a channel for inputs
    greeting_ch = Channel.of(greetings_array)
                         .flatten()
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="31"
    // create a channel for inputs
    greeting_ch = Channel.of(greetings_array)
                         .view { "Before flatten: $it" }
                         .flatten()
                         .view { "After flatten: $it" }
```

Here `$it` is an implicit variable that represents each individual item loaded in a channel.

#### 3.2.3. Run the workflow

Finally, you can try running the workflow again!

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf
```

This time it works AND gives us the additional insight into what the contents of the channel look like before and after we run the `flatten()` operator:

```console title="Output" linenums="1"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

Launching `hello-channels.nf` [tiny_elion] DSL2 - revision: 1d834f23d2

executor >  local (3)
[8e/bb08f3] sayHello (2) | 3 of 3 ✔
Before flatten: [Hello, Bonjour, Holà]
After flatten: Hello
After flatten: Bonjour
After flatten: Holà
```

> You see that we get a single `Before flatten:` statement because at that point the channel contains one item, the original array.

Reviewer 2: So far, I have seen the words value, element, and item referring to the same thing (what is known as a channel element) in part II. I'd rather stick to elements (and items being the individual entries within an element).

Author: Ok I agree with the push for consistency. But it's okay if some instances are left for later; getting the reorg merged soon is more important than having every word be perfect.

Then we get three separate `After flatten:` statements, one for each greeting, which are now individual items in the channel.

Importantly, this means each item can now be processed separately by the workflow.

!!! tip

    You should delete or comment out the `view()` statements before moving on.

    ```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="31"
    // create a channel for inputs
    greeting_ch = Channel.of(greetings_array)
                         .flatten()
    ```

    We left them in the `hello-channels-3.nf` solution file for reference purposes.

### Takeaway

> You know how to use an operator like `flatten()` to transform the contents of a channel, and how to use the `view()` directive to inspect channel contents before and after applying an operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You know how to use an operator like `flatten()` to transform the contents of a channel, and how to use the `view()` operator to inspect channel contents before and after applying an operator.
```

### What's next?

Learn how to make the workflow take a file as its source of input values.

---

## 4. Use an operator to parse input values from a CSV file

It's often the case that, when we want to run on multiple inputs, the input values are contained in a file.
As an example, we prepared a CSV file called `greetings.csv` containing several greetings, one on each line (like a column of data).

```csv title="greetings.csv" linenums="1"
Hello
Bonjour
Holà
```

So now we need to modify our workflow to read in the values from a file like that.

### 4.1. Modify the script to expect a CSV file as the source of greetings

To get started, we're going to need to make two key changes to the script:

- Switch the input parameter to point to the CSV file
- Switch to a channel factory designed to handle a file

#### 4.1.1. Switch the input parameter to point to the CSV file

> Remember the `params.greeting` parameter we set up in Part1?

Reviewer 2: Sometimes you add a space after Part. Some other times you don't. I'm for consistency + space after Part.
```suggestion
Remember the `params.greeting` parameter we set up in Part 1?
```

We're going to update it to point to the CSV file containing our greetings.

In the workflow block, make the following code change:

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="25"
/*
 * Pipeline parameters
 */
params.greeting = ['Hello','Bonjour','Holà']
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-channels.nf" linenums="25"
/*
 * Pipeline parameters
 */
params.greeting = 'greetings.csv'
```

#### 4.1.2. Switch to a channel factory designed to handle a file

> Since we now want to use a file instead of simple values as the input, we can't use the `Channel.of()` channel factory from before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since we now want to use a file instead of simple strings as the input, we can't use the `Channel.of()` channel factory from before.
```

Command executed:

  echo '[Bonjour]' > '[Bonjour]-output.txt'
```

This time Nextflow has parsed the contents of the file (yay!) but it's added brackets around the greetings.

Long story short, `splitCsv()` reads each line into an array, and each comma-separated value in the line becomes an element in the array.
So here it gives us three arrays containing one element each.

!!! note

    Even if this behavior feels inconvenient right now, it's going to be extremely useful later when we deal with input files with multiple columns of data.

We could solve this by using `flatten()`, which you already know.
However, there's another operator called `map()` that's more appropriate to use here and is really useful to know; it pops up a lot in Nextflow pipelines.

### 4.3. Use the `map()` operator to extract the greetings

The `map()` operator is a very handy little tool that allows us to do all kinds of mappings to the contents of a channel.

In this case, we're going to use it to extract that one element that we want from each line of our file.
This is what the syntax looks like:

```groovy title="Syntax"
.map { item -> item[0] }
```

> This means 'for each item in the channel, take the first of any elements it contains'.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means 'for each element in the channel, take the first of any items it contains'.
```

                     .splitCsv()
                     .view { "After splitCsv: $it" }
                     .map { item -> item[0] }
                     .view { "After map: $it" }
```

Once again we include another `view()` call to confirm that the operator does what we expect.

#### 4.3.2. Run the workflow one more time

Let's run it one more time:

```bash
nextflow run hello-channels.nf
```

This time it should run without error.

```console title="Output" linenums="1"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

Launching `hello-channels.nf` [tiny_heisenberg] DSL2 - revision: 845b471427

executor >  local (3)
[1a/1d19ab] sayHello (2) | 3 of 3 ✔
Before splitCsv: /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/greetings.csv
After splitCsv: [Hello]
After splitCsv: [Bonjour]
After splitCsv: [Holà]
After map: Hello
After map: Bonjour
After map: Holà
```

Looking at the output of the `view()` statements, we see the following:

- A single `Before splitCsv:` statement: at that point the channel contains one item, the original file path.
- Three separate `After splitCsv:` statements: one for each greeting, but each is contained within an array that corresponds to that line in the file.

> - Three separate `After map:` statements: one for each greeting, which are now individual items in the channel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Three separate `After map:` statements: one for each greeting, which are now individual elements in the channel.
```
